Molecule Types
===============================================================================

Molecules in a BioNetGen model are structured objects composed of components that can bind to each other, both within a molecule and between molecules. Components typically represent physical parts of proteins, such as the SH2 and SH3 domains of the adapter protein Grb2, or the PxxP motif of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos1 that serves as a binding site for SH3 domains. Components may also be associated with a list of state labels, which are intended to represent states or properties of the component. Examples of component states that can be modeled using state labels are conformation (e.g., open or closed) and phosphorylation status. There is no limit on the number of components that a molecule may have or on the number of possible state labels that may be associated with a component (see Note 5).

BioNetGen allows users to explicitly enforce typing of molecules using the molecule types block, which is optional but recommended. The molecule types block defines the allowed molecule names, the components of each molecule type (if any), and the allowed states of each of these components (if any). Each molecule type declaration begins with the name of a molecule (see Note 6) followed by an optional list of components in parentheses (see Note 7). The tilde character ("~") precedes each allowed state value. In the input file of BNGManual:Model 1, five molecule types are declared. These molecules have 1, 3, 2, 1, and 0 components, respectively. The component named Y1068 represents a tyrosine residue in EGFR that can be in either an unphosphorylated (U) or phosphorylated (P) state. For a molecule to be able to bind another molecule, at least one component must be defined. A molecule without components cannot bind or change states, but can be created or destroyed. Such a molecule essentially corresponds to a named chemical species in a conventional model (see BNGManual:Encoding Conventional Reactions). A component that appears in a molecule type declaration without a state label may be used only for binding and may not take on a state label in subsequent occurrences of the same molecule. In contrast, the potential binding partners of a component are not delimited in a molecule type declaration.

The namespaces for components of different molecules are separated, so it is permissible for components of different molecules to have the same name. However, if two components of the same molecule have the same name they are treated as separate instances of an identical type of object. For example, the two Fab arms of an IgG antibody have identical antigen-binding sites. Thus, the IgG antibody could be modeled as IgG(Fab,Fab). 



