Seed Species
===============================================================================

The seed species block defines the initial chemical species to which rules are applied. This block may also be used to define the initial levels of populated species and identify species with fixed concentrations. Before discussing the details of the seed species block, we need to briefly explain how chemical species are represented in BNGL.

Chemical species are individual molecules or sets of molecules connected by bonds between components, in which each component that has allowed state values has a defined state. For example, a cytosolic complex of Grb2 and Sos1 in the model of BNGManual:Model 1 would be represented as Grb2(SH2,SH3!1).Sos1(PxxP!1), where the "." character is used to separate molecules that are members of the same chemical species and the "!" character is a prefix for a bond name (any valid name is allowed, but we recommend using an integer, which makes BNGL expressions more readable). A shared name between two components indicates that the components are bonded. A complex of Grb2 and Sos1 that is associated with EGFR would be represented as EGFR(L,CR1,Y1068~P!2).Grb2(SH2!2,SH3!1).Sos1(PxxP!1), where the bond with the name "2" in this expression indicates that the SH2 domain of Grb2 is connected to the phosphorylated residue Y1068 in EGFR (i.e., connected to component Y1068 of the molecule EGFR, which is in the P state). Note that in a BNGL expression for a chemical species all components of each molecule are listed and each component that is allowed to have a state has one defined state chosen from among the set of possible states for that component. Wild card characters, which represent nonunique states and bonds, are not allowed in BNGL chemical species expressions. These wild card characters are discussed in BNGManual:Observables.

Finally, we note that the presence or absence of the molecule types block affects the way that molecules appearing in the seed species block are type checked (see Note 8).

Specifying the initial population level of a seed species is accomplished in the same way that a parameter value is assigned using either a numerical value or a formula, as can be seen in BNGManual:Model 1 (see Note 9). A species listed in the seed species block may also be designated as having fixed concentration (see Note 10).

Representation of molecular complexes in BNGL has been presented in this section to introduce the syntax of bonds, but, generally speaking, it is not necessary to define seed species that are complexes of molecules because they can be generated through a process of equilibration (see BNGManual:Actions), provided that there are rules that generate these complexes. If a complex species is defined and no reaction rule is specified that causes dissociation of the complex, the complex will be indivisible. A multimeric protein composed of several polypeptide chains could be specified in this way. 


